.TH CRAB 1 "2026-07-15" "crab 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
crab \- compression-based mutual-information grep
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B crab
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIQUERY\fR [\fIPATH\fR...]
.br
.B crab
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIQUERY\fR < \fIFILE\fR
.br
.B crab
\fB\-f\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIQUERY_FILE\fR [\fIPATH\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBcrab\fR selects and outputs the \fIk\fR chunks of text (or whole files,
in file mode) from input files, directory trees, or stdin that have the
greatest (or, optionally, least) mutual information with a user-supplied
query.  Two operating modes are supported:
.TP
\fBChunk mode\fR (default)
The query is a literal string.  Input files are partitioned into
fixed-size overlapping chunks; each chunk is scored independently.
.TP
\fBFile mode\fR (\fB\-f\fR / \fB\-\-file-mode\fR)
The query is a file path whose contents are read and used as the query.
Each target file is scored as a single unit \(em no chunking is
performed.  Output is one line per file: \fIfilepath score\fR.
.P
Mutual information is approximated via dictionary-preloaded compression:
.RS
.P
\fIMI-approx(Q, C)\fR = (|compress(C, dict=\[ti])| \-
|compress(C, dict=Q)| + |compress(Q, dict=\[ti])| \-
|compress(Q, dict=C)|) / 2
.P
where |compress(X, dict=D)| is the compressed size of X in bytes when the
compressor's internal buffers are pre-populated with dictionary D.  The empty
dictionary (\[ti]) provides the baseline.  Both measurements use identical
format overhead, which cancels out in the subtraction.  This directly
approximates I(Q;C) = (K(C) \- K(C|Q) + K(Q) \- K(Q|C)) / 2.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print the crate version and exit.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-algorithm\fR \fIALGO\fR
Compression algorithm: \fBlz4\fR, \fBelz\fR, \fBdeflate\fR, or \fBlzma\fR.
.P
.RS
By default, \fBcrab\fR auto-selects the algorithm:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBFile mode\fR: ELZ (unbounded window, best for whole-file comparison).
.IP \(bu
\fBChunk mode\fR: LZ4 when the estimated query + chunk size is less than
64 KB (the LZ4 window size); ELZ otherwise.
.br
The estimate for \fB\-\-chunk-lines\fR uses 120 bytes per line.
.sp
Explicitly specifying \fB\-\-algorithm\fR disables auto-selection.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-level\fR \fIN\fR
Compression level \fB0\fR\(en\fB9\fR (default: \fB6\fR).
Level 0 is fastest (least compression); level 9 is best (slowest).
The interpretation varies by algorithm:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBdeflate\fR: passed directly as zlib compression level.
.IP \(bu
\fBlz4\fR: mapped to acceleration \fI2^(9 \- level)\fR
(level\ 0 = accel\ 512, fastest; level\ 9 = accel\ 1, best).
.IP \(bu
\fBelz\fR: controls the string-table size via exponential scaling
(level\ 0 = 1,000 codes; level\ 6 = 1,000,000 codes;
level\ 9 = unbounded).
.IP \(bu
\fBlzma\fR: passed directly as LZMA compression level.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-dict-size\fR \fIN\fR
Dictionary / max-codes size.  Interpretation depends on algorithm:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBlzma\fR: LZMA dictionary size in bytes (default: 8,388,608 = 8 MB).
.IP \(bu
\fBelz\fR: maximum active codes in the string table
(\fB0\fR = unbounded).  When set, overrides the level-derived
max-codes value.
.IP \(bu
\fBdeflate\fR, \fBlz4\fR: accepted for compatibility but ignored.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-chunk-size\fR \fIN\fR
Chunk size in bytes (default: 4096).  Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-chunk-lines\fR.
Optional in chunk mode; ignored in file mode.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-chunk-lines\fR \fIN\fR
Chunk size in lines.  Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-chunk-size\fR.
Optional in chunk mode; ignored in file mode.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-overlap\fR \fIP\fR
Overlap percentage in the range 0\(en99 (default: 0).
0% produces adjacent non-overlapping chunks;
50% means each chunk starts halfway into the previous chunk.
Ignored in file mode.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-top\fR \fIN\fR
Number of results to return (default: 10).
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-recursive\fR
Search directories recursively.
If no paths are given, the current directory is searched.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-ignore-case\fR
Case-insensitive matching (ASCII only).
In chunk mode, the original (non-folded) bytes are preserved in the output.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-invert\fR
Return the \fIk\fR least-similar results in ascending order.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-file-mode\fR
Compare a query file against target files.
The first positional argument is interpreted as a query file path rather
than a literal query string.  Each target file is scored as a single unit
\(em no chunking is performed.  The \fB\-\-chunk-size\fR,
\fB\-\-chunk-lines\fR, and \fB\-\-overlap\fR flags are not required and
have no effect in this mode.  The query file is automatically excluded
from the target file list.  Output format differs from chunk mode (see
\fBOUTPUT FORMAT\fR below).
.TP
\fB\-\-include\fR \fIGLOB\fR
Include only files whose basename matches the shell-style glob pattern.
Repeatable.
.TP
\fB\-\-exclude\fR \fIGLOB\fR
Exclude files whose basename matches the shell-style glob pattern.
Repeatable.
Excludes override includes.
.TP
\fB\-\-max-depth\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum directory traversal depth (0 = root only; default: unlimited).
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-preprocess\fR \fICMD\fR
Pipe each input file (or stdin) through a shell command before scoring.
The command is executed via \fB/bin/sh \-c\fR \fICMD\fR; the raw file bytes
are written to the command\(cqs standard input, and the command\(cqs standard
output is captured and used as the pre\-processed input for all subsequent
processing (chunking, case folding, scoring).  Applies to all input sources
in both chunk mode and file mode.  In file mode, the query file is not
pre\-processed.  If the command exits with a non\-zero status, \fBcrab\fR
prints an error message and exits with code 2.  Pre\-processing occurs
before case folding (\fB\-i\fR).
.SH WINDOW-SIZE WARNING
DEFLATE uses a 32 KB sliding window; LZ4 uses a 64 KB dictionary limit;
LZMA uses a user-specified dictionary size (default 8 MB).
When a file or chunk exceeds the algorithm's window size, \fBcrab\fR emits
a warning to stderr identifying the file, its size, the algorithm, and the
window size, and notes that scoring accuracy may be reduced.  Processing
continues; the file or chunk is still scored and may appear in results.
.P
ELZ has no fixed window size by default and does not produce this warning.
When \fB\-\-dict-size\fR is set for ELZ (or \fB\-\-level\fR derives a
bounded max-codes value), the effective window size is approximately the
code limit in bytes, and the warning is emitted when input exceeds it.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
.SS Chunk mode (default)
Each selected chunk is output as a header line followed by the raw chunk
bytes, separated from the next chunk by a blank line.
The header format is:
.RS
.P
\fB## chunk=\fIN \fBscore=\fIS \fBfile=\fIP \fBoffset=\fIO\fR
.RE
.P
where \fIN\fR is the 1-based rank, \fIS\fR is the signed MI-approx score,
\fIP\fR is the source file path (or \fB(stdin)\fR), and \fIO\fR is the
0-based byte offset within the file (or 0-based line offset when
\fB\-\-chunk-lines\fR is used).
Chunks are output in descending score order (best first; ascending with
\fB\-v\fR).
.SS File mode (\fB\-f\fR)
Each result is output as a single line:
.RS
.P
\fIfilepath score\fR
.RE
.P
where \fIfilepath\fR is the path of the target file and \fIscore\fR is the
signed MI-approx score.  Results are sorted in descending score order (best
first; ascending with \fB\-v\fR).  No headers, no chunk data, no blank line
separators \(em one line per file only.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
1
Argument parsing error.
.TP
2
File I/O error (missing or unreadable file, or no readable files found).
.TP
3
Compression error (specific backend error is printed to stderr).
.TP
4
Empty input (no chunks formed, or no target files processed in file mode).
.SH EXAMPLES
.P
Search for the top 5 chunks most similar to "error" in a log file:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-s 200 \-k 5 error /var/log/syslog\fR
.RE
.P
Recursive case-insensitive search with a large chunk:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-r \-i \-s 300 "search term" /path/to/docs/\fR
.RE
.P
Find the 3 least-similar chunks:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-v \-s 150 \-k 3 "outlier" data.txt\fR
.RE
.P
Use the LZ4 algorithm explicitly with fast acceleration:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-a lz4 \-l 2 \-s 200 "search" data.txt\fR
.RE
.P
Use ELZ with a bounded string table (1M codes) and line chunks:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-a elz \-l 6 \-L 20 \-k 5 "query" data.txt\fR
.RE
.P
Override ELZ max-codes directly with \fB\-\-dict-size\fR:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-a elz \-D 500000 \-s 200 "query" data.txt\fR
.RE
.P
Compare a query file against a directory of target files (file mode):
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-f \-r \-k 5 template.txt /path/to/candidates/\fR
.RE
.P
Compare a query file against specific target files:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-f reference.txt file_a.txt file_b.txt file_c.txt\fR
.RE
.P
File mode with LZMA and a large custom dictionary:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-f \-a lzma \-D 16777216 reference.txt large_target.bin\fR
.RE
.P
Pre\-process files through a decompiler before scoring:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-p \(dqobjdump \-d \(dq \-s 500 \-k 5 \(dqpush rbp\(dq binary1 binary2\fR
.RE
.P
Strip HTML tags before semantic search:
.RS
.P
\fBcrab \-p \(dqsed \(aqs/<[^>]*>//g\(aq \(dq \-s 300 \(dqsearch term\(dq page.html\fR
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgrep\fR(1), \fBzlib\fR(3), \fBlz4\fR(1), \fBlzma\fR(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Garret Noble <garretnoble@gmail.com>
.br
Licensed under MIT OR Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception.
