.TH CRLZW 1 "2026-07-10" "crlzw 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
crlzw \- standalone LZW file compressor and decompressor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B crlzw
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.br
.B crlzw
\fB\-d\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.br
.B crlzw
\fB\-t\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBcrlzw\fR compresses or decompresses files using the LZW (Lempel\-Ziv\-Welch)
algorithm.  It produces \fB.cz\fR files with a fixed-size header containing
a magic number, format version, original uncompressed size, and the
max\-codes value used during compression.  The interface is modelled after
\fBgzip\fR(1), supporting common flags such as \fB\-d\fR (decompress),
\fB\-c\fR (stdout), \fB\-k\fR (keep), \fB\-f\fR (force), \fB\-v\fR
(verbose), \fB\-t\fR (test), \fB\-q\fR (quiet), \fB\-r\fR (recursive), and
\fB\-S\fR (custom suffix).
.P
LZW uses a dynamically growing string table.  The memory footprint is
controlled by the compression level (\fB\-1\fR through \fB\-9\fR) or the
\fB\-\-max\-codes\fR flag.  Bounded\-mode compression uses deterministic
random leaf eviction to stay within the code limit \-\- the decompressor
mirrors the same eviction deterministically, requiring no extra bits in
the compressed stream.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print the crate version and exit.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-decompress\fR
Decompress.  Each \fIFILE\fR must be a \fB.cz\fR file (or have a
recognised suffix; see \fBSUFFIX DETECTION\fR below).  The suffix is
stripped to produce the output filename, and the compressed file is
removed unless \fB\-k\fR is set.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-stdout\fR
Write output to standard output and keep original files unchanged.
Useful for pipelines: \fBcrlzw \-c file | crlzw \-dc\fR decompresses
on\-the\-fly.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-keep\fR
Keep input files.  When compressing, do not delete the uncompressed
file.  When decompressing, do not delete the compressed file.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-force\fR
Overwrite existing output files without prompting.  Without \fB\-f\fR,
if the output file already exists, \fBcrlzw\fR prompts the user on
stderr and reads a confirmation from stdin before overwriting.  When
not running interactively (stdin is not a terminal), \fBcrlzw\fR
behaves as if \fB\-f\fR were not given and exits with an error.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Print compression ratio to stderr for each file processed.  For
compression, the output shows \fIfilename\fR, original size,
compressed size, and the reduction as a percentage (negative
means expansion).  For decompression, original and decompressed
sizes are shown.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-test\fR
Test compressed file integrity.  Each \fIFILE\fR is decompressed
in memory and its format is checked (magic number, version, size
match).  On success, prints \fBOK\fR to stderr.  On failure,
prints an error message.  The exit code is non\-zero if any file
fails.  No output files are written.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppress all warning messages.  Error messages (fatal conditions)
are still printed to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-recursive\fR
If any command\-line argument is a directory, descend into the
directory and process all regular files within it.  When
compressing, each file is individually compressed to
\fIname\fP\fB.cz\fR.  When decompressing, each \fB.cz\fR file is
decompressed in place.  Traversal is depth\-first in lexicographic
order; symlinks are followed.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-suffix\fR \fISUF\fR
Use \fISUF\fR as the suffix instead of the default \fB.cz\fR.
When compressing, \fISUF\fR is appended to the original filename.
When decompressing, files whose names end with \fISUF\fR
(case\-insensitive) are processed, and the suffix is stripped to
produce the output filename.  A null suffix (\fB\-S ""\fR) forces
decompression to attempt processing all given files regardless of
suffix, relying on the magic\-number header for format detection.
.TP
\fB\-1\fR..\fB\-9\fR
Compression level.  Each level maps to a preset \fB\-\-max\-codes\fR
value controlling the LZW dictionary size and thus the
speed\-vs\-compression trade\-off.  Higher levels use larger
dictionaries, producing better compression at the cost of more
memory and CPU time.  Default is \fB\-6\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-fast\fR
Fastest compression (same as \fB\-1\fR).
.TP
\fB\-\-best\fR
Best compression (same as \fB\-9\fR; unbounded dictionary).
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-codes\fR \fIN\fR
Set the exact maximum number of LZW codes (0 = unbounded).  When
specified, this overrides the compression\-level preset.  The
semantics are identical to \fBcrab\fR(1)'s \fB\-\-lzw\-max\-codes\fR:
when the string table reaches \fIN\fR active codes, random leaf
eviction reuses code slots deterministically.
.SS Compression level presets
.TS
tab(|);
l l l l.
Level|Flag(s)|Max Codes|Approx. Memory
_
1|\-1, \-\-fast|1,000|~30 KiB
2|\-2|5,000|~150 KiB
3|\-3|10,000|~300 KiB
4|\-4|50,000|~1.5 MiB
5|\-5|250,000|~7.5 MiB
6|\-6 (default)|1,000,000|~30 MiB
7|\-7|2,500,000|~75 MiB
8|\-8|5,000,000|~150 MiB
9|\-9, \-\-best|0 (unbounded)|grows with input
.TE
.SH SUFFIX DETECTION
In decompression mode (\fB\-d\fR), \fBcrlzw\fR accepts files whose names
end with \fB.cz\fR, \fB\-cz\fR, or \fB_cz\fR (case\-insensitive), in
addition to any custom suffix specified with \fB\-S\fR.  For each file,
the magic number (\fBCRLZ\fR) is verified before decompression begins;
files without a valid header are skipped with a warning.
.SH .CZ FILE FORMAT
Compressed \fB.cz\fR files consist of a fixed\-size 17\-byte header
followed by the LZW bitstream:
.TS
tab(|);
l l l l.
Offset|Size|Field|Description
_
0|4 bytes|Magic|ASCII \fBCRLZ\fR (0x43 0x52 0x4C 0x5A)
4|1 byte|Version|Format version (1)
5|8 bytes|Original_Size|Uncompressed file size, little\-endian unsigned
| ||64\-bit
13|4 bytes|Max_Codes|Max\-codes value, little\-endian unsigned 32\-bit;
| ||0 = unbounded
17|N bytes|Bitstream|LZW\-compressed data, starting at 9\-bit codes
.TE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
1
Argument parsing error (invalid flag, missing value, value out of range).
.TP
2
File I/O error (missing/unreadable file, output file exists without
\fB\-f\fR when non\-interactive).
.TP
3
Compression or decompression error (malformed \fB.cz\fR file, LZW data
corruption).
.TP
4
Empty or no input.
.SH EXAMPLES
.P
Compress a file in place (replaces \fIfile\fR with \fIfile\fB.cz\fR):
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw file.txt\fR
.RE
.P
Decompress a file in place (restores \fIfile\fB.txt\fR):
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-d file.txt.cz\fR
.RE
.P
Compress to stdout (pipe):
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-c large.log | ssh remote "crlzw \-dc > large.log"\fR
.RE
.P
Compress with best compression (unbounded dictionary):
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-\-best file.bin\fR
.RE
.P
Compress all \fB.txt\fR files in a directory recursively:
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-r docs/\fR
.RE
.P
Test integrity of compressed files:
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-t *.cz\fR
.RE
.P
Compress with a custom suffix:
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-S .lzw file.txt\fR
.RE
.P
Compress with a specific code limit (fast, low memory):
.RS
.P
\fBcrlzw \-\-max\-codes 10000 large_file.txt\fR
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcrab\fR(1), \fBgzip\fR(1), \fBcompress\fR(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Garret Noble <garretnoble@gmail.com>
.br
Licensed under MIT OR Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception.
